Discovering Southern and East Africa’s Industrial Opportunities

Abstract

What are Southern and East Africa’s industrial
opportunities? In this article we explore this
question by using the product space to study the
productive structure of five Southern and East
African countries: Kenya, Mozambique, Rwanda,
Tanzania, and Zambia. The product space is a
network connecting products that tend to be
exported by the same sets of countries. Since
countries are more likely to develop products
that are close by in the product space to the ones
that they already produce, the product space can
be used to help anticipate a country’s industrial
opportunities. 

Our results suggest that the most natural avenue
for future product diversification for these five
Southern and East African nations resides in the
agricultural sector, since all of these nations appear
to have productive structures that are pre-adapted
to the production of many agricultural products
that none of them are currently exporting. 

We conclude this paper by exploring the potential
benefits of further regional economic integration
through an exercise in which we pull together the
productive structures of these five countries. This
exercise shows that the products that become more
accessible in the combined economy are once again
predominantly agricultural. These results suggest
that while diversification into all sectors should
remain an important long-term goal of the region,
the path towards increased diversification in the
near future may well lie in a more empowered and
diverse agricultural sector.